# Our Picture of the Universe
Turtles all the way down.

## round, motionless earth
Aristotle _On the Heavens_ (340 BC):
* Lunar eclipse: shadow is always round
* North star appears lower in the south 
* Greeks also noticed you see a sail first on the horizon.

Aristotle's Solar system:
* earth stationary
* everything on circular orbits around it
* "mystical reasons": "circular motion is the most perfect"

Ptolemy's Model:
* 2nd century AD 
* 8 spheres: moon, sun, stars, 5 known planets (Mercury, Venus Mars, Jupiter, Saturn)
* 5 planets on smaller circles (to match empirical observations)
* last sphere carried "fixed" stars
* Pro: reasonably accurate
* Con: meant moon is sometimes twice as close to the earth as other times
* Adopted by the Christian church, lots of room for heaven and hell

## the earth moves
Coppernican model:
* Nicholas Copernicus, 1514 (1300 years later!)
* Stationary sun
* planets on circular orbits
* supported by Johannes Kepler and Galileo Galilei
* 1609 Galileo saw moons of Jupiter
* To sustain assumption that the earth is the center, now need extremely complicated paths
* Copernican theory is simpler.
* Kepler suggested ellipses, resolving discrepancy with observations

Remaining problems
* Kepler thinks elipses are terrible
* Does work with his idea that magnetic forces make planets orbit the sun

## Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica
* Isaac Newton, 1687
* Theory of bodies moving in space and time
* Developed the calculus
* Universal gravitation

## The infinite universe
### Problem of the stars:
* Assume they are like the sun but far away
* Why don't they fall into each other
* Newton's 1691 letter to Richard Bentley:
  * This doesn't happen because there are an infinite number of stars
  * Turns out to be wrong
  * Correct approach is to start with the finite case and then add stars outside it
  * According to Newton's law, the extra stars don't help; still collapses
* Can't have an infinite static model of the universe in which gravity is always attractive

### Author Remark
* Before 20th century no one suggested an expanding or contracting universe
* "may have been due to people's tendency to believe in eternal truths, as well as the comfort they found in the thought that even though they may grow old and die, the universe is eternal and unchanging"

### repulsive gravity solution
* Make gravity repulse at very large distances
* now thought to be unstable:
  * getting slightly nearer would cause collapse
  * getting slightly father would drive everything apart

### bright sky objection
* in an infinite static universe every line of sight should end on a star
* Made famous by 1823 Heinrich Olbers
* Oblers suggested intervening matter blocked the light
* But this would eventually heat up until it was as bright as the stars
* To avoid this we assume stars had not been shining forever, and matter has not heated up yet
* This raises the question of what caused stars to start shining

## Beginning of the universe
* Explained in many early cosmologies (include Abrahamic religions)
* Need a "first cause" to explain the existence of the universe
* St. Augustine: civilization is progressing, so humans (and probably also the whole universe) couldn't have been around for too long
* Guesses 5000 BC

### Against beginnings
* Aristotle and Greeks: don't like divine intervention, so no creation
* World and people are forever
* Answer "progress" argument by saying there were periodic disasters that set us back to the beginning (probably more right than Augustine!)

### Kant's view
* 1781 Critique of Pure Reason
* antinomies: equally compelling reasons to believe the thesis universe had a beginning and the antithesis that it always existed (seems about right)
  * thesis: if no beginning, there was always an infinite amount of time before any event
  * antithesis: if it did have a beginning, there was an infinite period of time before that, so why then?

### Author's remark
* Both Kant's cases are the same: based on the assumption that time continues back forever.
* "As we shall see, the concept of time has no meaning before the beginning of the universer" -.^
* Augustine "pointed this out" saying "time was a property of the universe that God created"
  * OK so in other words, Hawking and physicists adopt Augustine's position

### Hawking on Metaphysics
* "When most people believed in an essentially static and unchanging universe, the question of whether or not it had a beginning was really one of metaphysics or theology."
* "One could account for what was observed equally well on the theory that the universe had existed forever or on the theory that it was set in motion at some finite time in such a manner as though to look as though it had existed forever."
  * In other words, Hawking thinks metaphysics / theology is the domain of claims that have no bearing on empirical observations. Or conversely, that anything empirically observable is within the realm of physics.
  * This is probably the view of metaphysics adopted by Positivists and Popper, maybe others. A view that metaphysics should be replaced by the scientific method.
  * Clearly, following the way continental philosophers are interpreting the word metaphysics, this cannot be done.
* Changes with Hubble's observation

## Big Bang
* 1929: Hubble observed that wherever you look, distant galaxies are moving away
* 10-20 thousand million years ago, it looks like they were all in the same place
* The universe was "infinitesimally small and infinitesimally dense"
* Different from other "beginnings" in that it is not imposed by some being outside the universe.

### Author's remark:
* "Under such conditions all the laws of science, and therefore all ability to predict the future, would break down."
* "If there were events earlier than this time, then they could not affect what happens at the present time. Their existence can be ignored because it would have no observational consequences." 
* "One may say that time had a beginning at the big bang, in the sense that earlier times simply would not be defined"
* "it would be meaningless to suppose that it was created before the big bang"

## Hawking on Scientific Theory
### Theories in theory
* "simpleminded view" that "a theory is just a model of the universe or a restricted part of it, and a set of rules that relate quantities in the model to obvservations we make."
* Exists only in our minds.
* Good theory:
  * must accurately describe a large class of observations on the basis of a model that contains only a few arbitrary elements.
  * must make definite predictions about the results of future observations 
* Any theory is always provisional.
* "you can disprove a theory by finding even a single observation that disagrees with the predictions of the theory."
  * Karl Popper
  * "A good theory makes a number of predictions that could in principle be disproved or falsified by observation."
  * "At least that is what is supposed to happen, but you can always question the competence of the person who carried out the observation." [Descartes' entire point!]

### Theories in practice
* New theory is really an extension of the previous theory.

### Goal of science
Provide a single theory that describes the whole universe.

### Science in practice
* Laws that tell us how the universe changes with time
* Question of the initial state of the universe.

START HERE: God discussion


### Relocate:
#### Remark
We have in a short space several arguments for accepting the Big Bang as the beginning of time. The most compelling is that the conditions of the Big Bang would cause "all laws of science, and therefore all ability to predict the future" to "break down." Since there is no way to predict a subsequent state from a time before this moment, Hawking concludes that "if there were events earlier than this time... they could not affect what happens at the present time." and thus "their existence can be ignored because it would have no observational consequences."

According to this explanation, the interpretation Hawking gives for the claim that "time had a beginning at the big bang" is that this is true "in the sense that ealier time simply would not be defined."

This explanation takes the following questionable implicit assumptions for granted:
* The only definition of "time" is as a variable in an equation meant to model physical events.
* If there is a state that does not improve the physicist's effort to model events (i.e. improve prediction of the future) it "can be ignored." Meaning, it can be ignored by physicists. Obviously, this is not the same as saying it didn't exist or didn't happen. In fact, the point is that physics has no way to make such a claim.
* The claim that "all the laws of science" would "break down" seems to call for further elaboration. We need to know not only that our current set of laws would break down, but that there could be no possible laws. I'm not sure how that could be shown.

Despite these problems, the explanation above is essentially honest about the limitations of the claim that time began at the big bang.

Almost immediately after, however, Hawking makes a further claim that "it would be meaningless to suppose that [the universe] was created before the big bang." Additionally, even if one believes in God, Hawking claims the laws of physics somehow prevent a narrative in which God created the universe before the big bang. Clearly, this does not follow and it's hard to imagine what might have prompted Hawking to take this position.

#### Philosophers of Science

