# What is AI?
Four classes of definitions, combining 2 characteristics
* Focus on thought vs behavior
* Measurement: actual human vs "rationality"

Rationality: 
* "an _ideal_ performance measure... A system is rational if it does the "right thing," given what it knows."

#### Remark:
* "the pursuit of human-like intelligence must be in part an empirical science related to psychology, involving observations and hypotheses about actual human behavior and thought processes"
* "A rationalist approach involves a combination of mathematics and engineering, and connects to statistics, control theory and economics."
* Footnote: "We are merely conceding that human decisions are not always mathematically perfect."

#### Injection:
* The authors hope to define a non-human or super-human rationality.
* Using cleaner tools.
* But where do these tools come from?

## Acting Humanly

### Turing Test:
* Alan Turing, 1950
* "designed as a thought experiment that would sidestep the philosophical vagueness of the question "Can a machine think?"
* "A computer passes the test if a human interrogator, after posing some written questions, cannot tell whether the written responses come from a person or from a computer."
* See Ch 27 for details and "whether a computer would really be intelligent if it passed"

To pass, the computer would need the following capabilities:
* natural language processing
* knowledge representation
* automated reasoning
* machine learning (to adapt and extrapolate)

### Total Turing Test
Adds:
* Video signal to test perception
* ability to pass objects "through the hatch"

Requirements:
* Computer vision
* Robotics

Remarks:
* "These six disciplines compose most of AI, and Turing deserves credit for designing a test that remains relevant 60 years later. Yet AI researchers have devoted little effort to passing the Turing Test..."
* Artificial flight "succeeded when the Wright brothers and others stopped imitating birds..."
* "Aeronautical engineering texts do not define the goal of their field as "making machines that fly so exactly like pigeons that they can fool even other pigeons"

#### Interjection:
* This is stunningly arrogant.
* Thinking is not like flying.
* What Turing realized, and Russell and Norvig do not, is that humans are the only measure of intelligence, having invented the idea.
* Thus the criteria of "rationality" is simply the authors' judging methodology in an alternate Turing test in which they pose questions to the machine in terms of problems of the form "What would you do if X?" They then evaluate the responses against their metric.
* They also miss that it is perfectly possible for a human to "fail" the test. That is, the judge can guess wrong. 
* A judge who is not that bright could fail to perceive the intelligence of an answer. And in fact this happens with computers all the time.
* The presentation occludes a key issue: what is the difference between rationality and actual human behavior?
  * Are we making mistakes? The machine is allowed to make mistakes.
  * Are we sub-optimal? The machine is allowed to be sub-optimal.
  * Certainly we have the same objective / desire and the same performance measure because we define both of these.
  * At the same time, there is such a tremendous variety of human behavior it would be impossible to simulate it _in general_.
 
## Thinking Humanly
The cognitive modeling approach
* Example: work on General Problem Solver by Allen Newell and Herbert Simon

Three ways to understand human minds:
* Introspection
* pyschological experiments
* brain imaging

Claims:
* "Once we have a sufficiently precise theory of the mind, it becomes possible to express the theory as a computer program."
* "If the programs input-output behavior matches corresponding human behavior, that is evidence that some of the program's mechanisms could also be operating in humans."

#### Interjection:
* This comparison of input-output behavior does not imply that program's mechanisms are operating in humans. This is the whole point of a black-box model. The text is heavily heding here.
* Note that human thought processes can change.

### Cognitive Science
Testable theories of human mind from:
* Computer models from AI
* Experimental psychology

We now distinguish between the claims 
* that an algorithm performs well on a task
* that an algorithm is a good model for human performance

Claims:
* Computer vision is an example of an area in which the two fields are mutually compatible.
* CV incorporates "neurophysiological evidence into computational models"
* "Recently, the combination of neuroimaging methods combined [sic] with machine learning techniques.. has led to the beginnings of a capability to "read minds"--that is, to ascertain the semantic content of a person's inner thoughts."

## Thinking Rationally
* "right thinking" == "irrefutable reasoning processes"
* credit to Aristotle's syllogisms
* study of "laws of thought" == logic

19th century logic
* precise notation for objects and relations in the world
* "Contrast this with ordinary arithmetic notation, which provides only for statements about _numbers_."

logicist tradition
* hopes to build logic solvers into intelligent systems
* obstacle 1: hard to take informal knowledge and formalize it (hard to handle uncertainty)
* obstacle 2: many problems are intractable 
* Note both of the above obstacles always apply, we just noticed them first in the logicist tradition

## Acting Rationally

"agent"
* something that acts
* Latin agere, "to do"

computer agent expectations
* operate autonomously
* perceive environment
* persist over a prolonged time period
* adapt, change and create and pursue goals

rational agent
* acts to achieve the best outcome
* in uncertainty, best expected outcome




